Single Touch Payroll, STP, is in practice now.  Payroll events digital data are flowing into Australian Taxation Office, ATO, with effect from July 01, 2018. Single Touch Payroll reporting is applicable to the employers with twenty or more employees on their payroll register. Employers with lesser employees may report STP payroll event as an optional now, but mandated from July 01, 2019.
But, what is STP? How it makes the life of payroll staff and employers different from what they do before STP implementation. Single Touch Payroll is a digital data conductor between payroll software or lodgement portal like GovReports and ATO. The payroll event reportable information is digitally transmitted to ATO as and when the payroll event takes place. The personnel involved in payroll management need not take any special efforts as the payroll software or GovReports does the STP lodgement role for them.
Australian government is experimenting Standard Business Reporting, since 2008, towards the ‘Digital by default’ objectives in the B2G reporting. The reportable data originated from any business transaction should be passed on to ATO as a natural business process. ‘Tell us once’ – ATO is directing the businesses to use STP portal like GovReports, the natural business process reporting system. At the receiving end, ATO will process the data and send to respective divisions which eliminate the following reporting obligations to the employers:
1.	Tax file number declaration
2.	Activity statements – IAS
3.	PAYG payment summary to employees
4.	Payment summary annual reports
In addition to the above, Single Touch Payroll reporting brings in prefill information of wages, allowances and payg withheld details to the individual income tax returns. Individuals can get the income and payg details from myGov/myTax whereas tax agents can get the prefill information of their clients in their Practitioner Lodgement Software, PLS, for income tax return preparation and lodgement.
GovReports is one of the digital service providers actively participated with ATO-STP developments and released for employers since July 2018. GovReports application act as a cloud portal for the employers to update the payroll event data and lodge directly to ATO. If the employer is using a non STP enabled payroll software GovReports allows the import of payroll event reportable information. The payroll data imported can be reviewed and edited, if needed, before lodging through GovReports. The payroll function available with the accounting module, Interactive Accounts Manager, IAM, is useful for the micro employers to create payroll event and report it as STP directly from GovReports.  
Digital transformation is taking place with the implementation of Single Touch Payroll in Australia. Businesses must expedite their digital transformation through Single Touch Payroll to drive their business forward. They must adapt to technological changes, work to improve the growth and profitability taking Single Touch Payroll as an opportunity. All of these technological advancement s, whether on the fringe or in the middle of success, have the opportunity to change the face of the business forever.
